Federalist
51 the structure of the government must
furnish the proper checks and balances
between the different apartments from
the New York packet Friday February 8th
1788 Hamilton or Madison to the people
of the state of New
York to what expedient then shall we
finally Resort for maintaining in
practice the necessary partition of
power among the several departments as
laid down in the Constitution the only
answer that can be given is is that as
all these exterior Provisions are found
to be inadequate the defect must be
supplied by so contriving the interior
structure of the government as that its
several constituent parts may by their
Mutual relations be the means of keeping
each other in their proper places
without presuming to undertake a full
development of this important idea I
will Hazard a few General observations
which may perhaps place it in a clearer
light and enable us to form a more
correct Judgment of the principles and
structure of the government planned by
the
convention in order to lay a due
foundation for that separate and
distinct exercise of the different
powers of government which to a certain
extent is admitted on all hands to be
essential to the preservation of Liberty
it is evident that each department
should have a will of its own and
consequently should be so constituted
that the members of each should have as
Little Agency as possible in the
appointment of the members of the others
were this principle rigorously adhered
to it would require that all the
appointments for the Supreme executive
legislative and Judiciary magistracies
should be drawn from the same Fountain
of authority the people through channels
having no communication whatever with
one another perhaps such a plan of
constructing the several departments
would be less difficult in practice than
it may in contemplation appear some
difficulties however and some additional
expense would attend the execution of it
some deviations therefore from the
principle must be admitted in the
constitution of the Judiciary Department
in particular it might be an expedient
to insist rigorously on the principle
first because peculiar qualifications
being essential in the members the
primary cons consideration ought to be
to select that mode of choice which best
secures these
qualifications secondly because the
permanent tenure by which the
appointments are held in that department
must soon destroy all sense of
dependence on the authority conferring
them it is equally evident that the
members of each department should be as
little dependent as possible on those of
the others for the emoluments annex to
their offices were the executive
magistrate or the judges not independent
of the legislature in this particular
their independence in every other would
be merely nominal but the Great security
against a gradual concentration of the
several powers in the same Department
consists in giving to those who
administer each department the necessary
constitutional means and personal
motives to resist encroachments of the
others the provision for defense must in
this as in all other cases be made
commensurate to the danger of attack
ambition must be made to counteract
ambition the interest of the man must be
connected with the constitutional rights
of the place it may be a reflection on
human nature that such devices should be
necessary to control the abuses of
government but what is government itself
but the greatest of all Reflections on
human nature if men were Angels no
government would be necessary if Angels
were to govern men neither external nor
internal controls on government would be
necessary in framing a government which
is to be administered by men over men
the great difficulty lies in this you
must first enable the government to
control the Govern and in the next place
oblige it to control itself a dependence
on the people is no doubt the primary
control on the government but experience
has taught mankind the necessity of
auxiliary precautions this policy of
supplying by opposite and rival
interests the defect of better motives
might be traced through the whole system
of human Affairs private as well as
public we see it particularly displayed
in all the subordinate distributions of
power where the constant aim is to
divide and arrange the several offices
in such a manner that each may be a
check on the other that the private
interest of every individual may be a
sentinel over the public rights these
inventions of prudence cannot be less
requisite in the distribution of the
Supreme powers of the state but it is
not possible to give to each department
an equal power of self-defense in
Republican government the legislative
Authority necessarily predominates the
remedy for this inconveniency is to
divide the legislature into different
branches and to render them by different
modes of election and different
principles of action as little connected
with each other as the nature of their
common functions and their common
dependence on the society will admit it
may even be necessary to guard against
dangerous encroachments by still further
precautions as the weight of the
legislative Authority requires that it
should be thus divided the weakness of
the executive may require on the other
hand that it should be
fortified an absolute negative on the
legislature appears at first view to be
the natural defense with which the
executive magistrate should be armed but
perhaps it would be neither altogether
safe nor alone sufficient on ordinary
occasions it might not be exerted with
the requisite firmness and on
extraordinary occasions it might be
perfidiously abused may not this defect
of an absolute negative be supplied by
some qualified connection between this
weaker department and the weaker branch
of the stronger Department by which the
latter may be led to support the
constitutional rights of the former
without being too much detached from the
rights of its own Department if the
principles on which these observations
are founded be just as I persuade myself
they are and they be applied as a
Criterion to the several state
constitutions and to the Federal
Constitution it will be found that if
the latter does not perfectly correspond
with them the former are infinitely less
able to be such a test there are
moreover two considerations particularly
applicable to the federal system of
America which place that system in a
very interesting point of view first in
a single Republic all the power
surrendered by the people is submitted
to the administration of a single
government and the usurpations are
guarded against by a division of the
government into distinct and separate
departments in the compound Republic of
America the power surrendered by the
people is first divided between two
distinct governments and then the
portion allotted to each subdivided
among distinct and separate departments
hence a double security arises to the
rights of the people the different
governments will control each other at
the same time that each will be
controlled by itself second it is of
great importance in a republic not only
to guard the society against the
oppression of its rulers but to guard
one part of the society against the
Injustice of the other part different
interests necessarily exist in different
classes of citizens if a majority be
United by a common interest the rights
of the minority will be insecure
there are but two methods of providing
against this evil the one by creating a
will in the community independent of the
majority that is of the society itself
the other by comprehending in the
society so many separate descriptions of
citizens as will render an unjust
combination of a majority of the whole
very improbable if not
impracticable the first method prevails
in all governments possessing an
hereditary or self-appointed authority
this at best is but a precarious
security because a power independent of
the society may as well espouse the
unjust views of the major as the
rightful interests of the minor party
and may possibly be turned against both
parties the second method will be
exemplified in the federal republic of
the United States whilst all authority
in it will be derived from and dependent
on the society the society itself will
be broken into so many parts interests
and classes of citizens that the rights
of individuals or of the minority will
be in little danger from interested
combinations of the majority in a free
government the security for civil rights
must be the same as that for religious
rights it consists in the one case in
the multiplicity of interests and in the
other in the multiplicity of sects the
degree of security in both cases will
depend on the number of interests and
sects and this may be presumed to depend
on the extent of country and number of
people comprehended under the same
government this view of the subject must
particularly recommend a proper federal
system to all the sincere and
considerate friends of Republican
government since it shows that in exact
proportion as the territory of the Union
may be formed into more circumscribed
confederacies or States pressive
combinations of a majority will be
facilitated the best security under the
Republican forms for the rights of every
class of citizens will be diminished and
consequently the stability and
Independence of some member of the
government the only other security must
be proportionately
increased Justice is the end of
government it is the end of Civil
Society it ever has been and ever will
be pursued until it be obtained or until
Liberty be lost in the pursuit in a
society under the forms of which the
stronger faction can readily unite and
oppress the weaker Anarchy may as truly
be said to reign as in a state of nature
where the weaker individual is not
secured against the violence of the
stronger and as in the latter State even
the stronger individuals are prompted by
the uncertainty of their condition to
submit to a government which may protect
the weak as well as themselves so in the
former state will the more powerful
factions or parties be gradually induced
by a likee motive to wish for a
government which will protect all
parties the weaker as well as the more
powerful it can be little doubted that
if the state of Rhode Island was
separated from the Confederacy and left
to itself the insecurity of rights under
the popular form of government within
such narrow limits would be displayed by
such reiterated oppressions of fous
majorities that some power altogether
independent of the people would soon be
called for by the voice of the very
factions whose misrule had proved the
necessity of it in the extended Republic
of the United States and among the great
variety of interests parties and sects
which it Embraces a coalition of the
majority of the whole society could
seldom take place on any other
principles than those of justice and
general good whilst there being thus
less danger to a minor from the will of
a major party there must be less pretext
also to provide for the security of the
former by introducing into the
government a will not dependent on the
latter or in other words a will
independent of the society itself it is
no less certain than it is important
notwithstanding the contrary opinions
which have been entertained that the
larger the society provided it lie
within a practical sphere the more duly
capable it will be of self-government
and happily for the Republican cause the
practicable sphere may be carried to a
very great extent by a judicious
modification and mixture of the federal
principle pus